=head1 NAME

XML::Xalan::XObject - Base class for XSLT data type classes

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use XML::Xalan;
  ...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Arguments passed to and the value returned from an XLST function will be of type of one of the classes 
derived from C<XML::Xalan::XObject>: C<XML::Xalan::Boolean>, C<XML::Xalan::Number>, C<XML::Xalan::String>,
C<XML::Xalan::NodeSet>, or C<XML::Xalan::Scalar>. 

=head1 C<XML::Xalan::NodeSet>

B<All location path expressions> will return an object of this type, even if the expression only 
returns a single attribute or a text node (node set with one member).

=head2 Methods

=over 4

=item $nodeset->number()

Returns the numeric representation (a numeric scalar).

=item $nodeset->string()

Returns the stringified nodeset (a string scalar). 

=item $nodeset->boolean()

Returns the boolean representation.

=item $nodeset->get_nodelist()

Returns a list of L<XML::Xalan::DOM> node objects. 

=back

=head1 C<XML::Xalan::String>

XSLT string() function returns an object of this type.

=head2 Methods

=over 4

=item $string->value()

Returns the string value. 

=back

=head1 C<XML::Xalan::Number>

XSLT number() function returns an object of this type.

=head2 Methods

=over 4

=item $number->value()

Returns the numeric value.

=back

=head1 C<XML::Xalan::Boolean>

XSLT conditional expression returns an object of this type.

=head2 Methods

=over 4

=item $bool->value()

Returns the boolean value.

=back

=head1 C<XML::Xalan::Scalar>

A Perl scalar. Useful if your extension function returns a value which doesn't suit to any of the 
above XSLT built-in data types, for example a blessed reference.

=head2 Methods

=over 4

=item $scalar->value()

Returns the scalar value.

=back

=head1 BUGS

C<XML::Xalan::ResultTreeFragment> isn't supported yet. 

=head1 AUTHOR

Edwin Pratomo, edpratomo@cpan.org

=head1 SEE ALSO

C<XML::Xalan::Transformer>(3), C<XML::Xalan::DOM>(3), C<XML::Xalan::XObjectFactory>(3).

=cut
